---
layout: post
title: "The Circle of Life: Amazon Web Services and Open Source"
---

A series of recent announcements at Amazon's re:Invent is really impressive. Amazon Web Services (AWS) seems to be a top enterprise grade Platform as a Service. Amazon has an astonishing roster of production-ready services covering everything an enterprise cloud service or application needs: messaging, key-value storage, distributed file system, elastic load balancing and compute, single sign on and now and [IoT](https://aws.amazon.com/iot/). I'm sure there will be more to follow and enterprises will try to experiment and adopt much of it. 

# Present
Modern Platform as a Service (PaaS) can be viewed as a data center operating system (DCOS), a term I picked up from [Mesosphere](http://mesosphere.com). Like an ordinary server operating system, FreeBSD, Microsoft Windows or Linux, it manages computer hardware and software resources and provides common services for computer programs. What was memory, CPU and file system management in operating system is now task scheduling in Amazon EMR, and distributed storage in S3. What was a message system in Windows or Linux is now a pub-sub message bus in Amazon Kinesis. Instead of a single computer, we are applying the same concepts to the ensemble of server nodes. Thousands and hundreds of thousands of them.

# Past
Now here's a bird's eye view into a history of operating systems. For the purposes of this article, I'll make it a really short and schematic one, omitting a lot of details. In the beginning of personal and server computing and for many years operating systems were proprietary and closed source: Windows, Unix and others. Each would work with it's sets of hardware, compilers and languages, each would have their own software development kits, developer programs and system design patterns. Each was a good enough blackbox, until you wanted to move faster than your operating system provider does, supporting more hardware, giving you more options and building a vibrant universe of open source software which would eventually beat proprietary closed source systems. At the same time, scarcely visible to general public GNU and Free Software Foundation, and eventually Linux were born. Roughly 15 years later, the majority of cloud servers are running Open Source Linux. While being supported commercially by companies like Canonical and Red Hat, the operating system is free to install, run, extend and modify. 

# Future
So considering Data Center Operating Systems (aka Platform as a Service) are a real thing, and considering the past trajectory of Operating Systems, what is to be concluded? I would assume that the same transition from proprietary to open source will happen to Platform as a Service (aka Data Center Operating System). In recent years there were significant advancements in the development of server platforms. Many of these platforms are distributed under Apache License or been transferred to Apache Foundation: Kafka for messaging, Mesos for resource management and elasticity, Cassandra and Riak for key-value storage, Hadoop's HDFS for distributed filesystems, Spark for compute. Moreover there is Mesosphere's DCOS, while the management part of it is not entirely open source, it is used to manage the infrastructure and keep all components in place forming an open source cloud stack. This trend looks very promising and I am betting that Open Source platforms will become the stack of choice for cloud as well as they did for computers. What is now Amazon S3 will become HDFS running on any infrastructure, and so on. What has been Free Software Foundation in the beginning of Linux is now Apache in the cloud era.
