---
layout: post
title: A fresh perspective on Volkswagen Scandal
---
Everyone is furiously commenting on VW's epic cheating on diesel emissions tests. It's all over the news and it will make a huge impact on VW itself and the automotive industry as a whole. Just the thought of a potential collapse of VW Finance going down due to the resale value of diesel vehicles that are being financed or leased makes me shudder. But let's stop for a moment, and turn our eyes away from the analysts' and reporters' comments to the original [report](http://www.theicct.org/news/epas-notice-violation-clean-air-act-volkswagen-press-statement) published by EPA and ICCT (International Council for Clean Transportation) and read this paragprah:

*... In the tests, conducted over five pre-defined routes categorized based on their predominant driving conditions (highway, urban/suburban, and rural-up/downhill driving), real-world nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions from the Jetta exceeded the US-EPA Tier2-Bin5 (at full useful life) standard by 15 to 35 times. For the Passat, real-world NOx emissions were 5 to 20 times the standard. The BMW vehicle was generally at or below the standard, and only exceeded it during rural uphill operating conditions. (See the detailed fact sheet below for more on this study.)... *

This made me search for EPA Tier2-Bin5 and lead to the [government page](http://www3.epa.gov/otaq/standards/light-duty/tier2stds.htm) that had a requirements summary but didn't have the actual tests explained, which made me scroll all the way down and click on "40 CFR 86 Subpart S". I was looking for an explanation of diesel engines tests, but landed on 40 CFR 87 describing emission tests for... ...airplane engines. And no, I didn't find a way to report a bug and ask the webmaster to correct the broken link. After searching for 40 CFR 86 I found what I was looking for: an elaborate document with testing procedures. Infinite pages of it. While being extremely heavy on legalese one could still recreate a test protocol from it. So yes, it is conceivable that, knowing the test protocol, one could trick it with a defeat device.

EPA certification relies on a very formal test protocol. For a good engineer it isn’t rocket science to create a workaround that would trick the test. The debate of why any engineer would be willing to do that should be left out of scope of this article. 

# Here comes internet of things
Let's take a look at not-so-recent progress in technology. On-board diagnostics (OBD) is an automotive term referring to a vehicle's self-diagnostic and reporting capability. Since 1996 the OBD-II specification is mandatory for all cars manufactured in the United States to be sold in the United States. Since 2008 all cars sold in the United States are required to use an even more specific form of a standard, ISO 15765-4. Now search for ELM327 chip, available since 2010, a OBD II data logger that can log and store your vehicle's diagnostic data. Some of these devices can even upload that data on your smartphone and push it into the cloud. Imagine your vehicle's' operational and emissions data, including a dreaded NOx, every few seconds, at your fingertips! How much are these devices? They are incredibly cheap. Some of them are as cheap as $6. But let's call it $10. Although at volume it will be much cheaper. So a mandatory device permanently integrated into a vehicle syncing it's data into the cloud could solve the multi-billion dollar catastrophe that we are about to experience? 

There's no question of where that $10 per vehicle will be coming from. The existing test protocols are elaborate, and give us a mere approximation of a vehicle’s emissions in real life. These protocols also require armies of engineers and lawyers to define, verify, write and execute. Moreover they are paid for in part by taxpayers’ money. Instead of all that, using a cheap and simple logging device mandatory for all manufacturers could save the owners of VW 2.0 TDI clean diesel cars from losing hundreds or even thousands of dollars in their vehicle’s resale value. With that kind of device installed, manufacturers could self-certify a new vehicle, and both EPA and manufacturers could monitor emissions for the entire year and model in near real time. 

I  agree that VW's lie is completely unacceptable, but lets look at the other side. A lack of use of the readily available technological measures to prevent that from happening poses some questions as well. Technology is changing a lot of things, from hailing a cab to booking a hotel room. The EPA's failure to adopt new technologies can be disastrous, both financially and environmentally.
