---
layout: post
title: Redefining the Meaning of Big Data and Scalability with the Internet of Things
---
*"The complexity for minimum component costs has increased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per year. Certainly over the short term this rate can be expected to continue, if not to increase. Over the longer term, the rate of increase is a bit more uncertain, although there is no reason to believe it will not remain nearly constant for at least 10 years."*
 
*Gordon Moore, 1965*
 
Moore’s law and its derivatives are widely applicable in a context much broader than transistors, their cost and density, as originally stated by co-founder of Intel Corporation. The pace at which IoT is moving and the nature of technologies that make up IoT are not an exception. Ever decreasing hardware costs for sensors, microcontrollers and industrial computers, their increasing versatility and performance, as well as availability and bandwidth of data networks allow us to capture lots of physical parameters of remote systems. This includes oil well machinery, truck telemetry, diesel generator operational parameters or the state of your home boiler or furnace. The availability of data presents a great opportunity for industrial and home use. Having access to historical data, as well as to  streams of data in real time, makes our systems actually smart. This allows us to respond to complex changes in behavior as well as to analyze historical events.
 
To fully embrace the new opportunities we need to learn how to deal with operational data. In order to do this, we need to drop the habit of looking at our IoT systems the same way we look at consumer web or e-commerce applications or enterprise systems, where instead of users interacting with the system we have devices sending their data and polling for instructions. The biggest difference is that an IoT system needs to be more responsive and much more scalable. The good news is that there are a number of system design tradeoffs and paradigm shifts that make it possible. The closest consumer Internet application that comes to mind is Twitter: one can think of IoT as a Twitter for devices. While Twitter is one of a kind, there are dozens of unique IoT segments and potential applications. So what is there in IoT that makes it look like Twitter and what can IoT learn from it? The similarity is short messages coming in at a very high rate; most of them matter in real time or in a short time period, a micro batch, which can afterwards be stored for later browsing, search and analysis. The same is true for IoT: we want our systems to respond to short device status updates and we want to analyze historical data, creating reports and adjusting our real-time models. An example could be a vibration sensor attached to an industrial motor, pump or some part of an HVAC system: it’s parameters are accumulated in real-time, and measured against historical averages for normal operation in a given environment, triggering alerts when system parameters are outside of the dynamically calculated range for normal operation. The Twitter system re-engineering for scalability has been widely publicized: http://www.wired.com/2013/09/the-second-coming-of-java/ and is out there for all of us to learn how to build message-oriented systems that scale.
 
The following are the most important architecture and infrastructure qualities the system should have. These will help you evaluate your IoT systems or services provided by third party platforms. They are greatly inspired by the [Reactive Manifesto](http://www.reactivemanifesto.org) and are now reinforced by increasing demands for reliable IoT.
Responsive — focus on providing rapid and consistent response times, establishing reliable upper bounds so they deliver a consistent quality of service. This becomes extremely important when data is being pushed by sensor networks or other constrained equipment functioning autonomously, which allows little room for error handling.
Resilient — The system stays responsive in the face of failure. Failures are contained within each component, isolating components from each other and thereby ensuring that parts of the system can fail and recover without compromising the system as a whole. IoT systems are complex by nature and having resiliency supported at the very core of the system ensures that operational expenses of running the system under a heavy load without downtime are going to stay manageable.
Elastic — The system stays responsive under a varying workload. Reactive Systems can react to changes in the input rate by increasing or decreasing the resources allocated to service these inputs. Much like Twitter, there are bursts of activity in IoT systems that are happening around certain times of day or events. This maintains a big idle infrastructure, as well as a failure to respond to a spike in demand, which is equally damaging for business and operations.
Message Driven — reactive Systems rely on asynchronous message passing to establish a boundary between components that ensures loose coupling, isolation, and location transparency. this also provides the means to delegate errors as messages. Employing explicit message passing enables load management, elasticity, and flow control by shaping and monitoring the message queues in the system. Messages are at the very heart of the IoT, and backed systems should be built around that. As much as it is practical, the systems should rely on immutable records, so the state can be reconstructed for any point in time: for example a smart meter’s present value is all of it’s historical events applied to it. The same is true for system configuration: there should be a recipe on how to automatically build, configure and provision each component of the system from ground up.
 
Similar to the early days of the Internet, the killer app for IoT is yet to be found, in the meantime, it’s important to make sure the components of IoT systems are reliable and built right, based on  relevant knowledge derived from successful Internet services.

